---
title       : "Vernacular Patterns in Portugal and Brazil"
subtitle    : "Evolution and Adaptations"
author      : Pedro P. Palazzo
date        : "Traditional Architecture Conference 2021"
lang        : "en-GB"
title-slide-attributes:
  data-background-image: https://hcommons.org/app/uploads/sites/1002372/2021/10/pt-castelo_vide-cidade_renascentista-1.jpg
---

# Introduction #

Traditional towns in Portugal and Brazil evolved a finely tuned
coordination between standardized lot sizes and house typology.

This coordination allowed for piecemeal urban growth and the resilient
building of towns and cities up to the early twentieth century.

Here, I want to highlight examples of decentralised processes of
town-building since the thirteenth century that have resulted in
emergent order systems, both in planned new towns and in organic urban
growth.

Traditional Portuguese urbanism relied on just a few general
regulations, and mostly on a shared set of patterns that both formally
trained engineers and vernacular builders had access to.

This system entrusted the professional on site to make most decisions,
and at the same time ensured that these decisions followed from a
unified tradition.

The vernacular town-building patterns in Portugal and Brazil are not
just a result of particular conditions of the Early Modern period.

Because the ability to carry out these patterns rested with the local
builder or engineer, this system provides a model for a decentralized
and resilient urban development.

Vernacular urban modules and building types were even able to adapt to
the early stages of industrialization by generating new housing forms
for working-class and suburban neighbourhoods.

Claims of cultural continuity over several centuries and large regions
are uncommon in historical research nowadays; historians feel safer
treating different periods as if they were incommensurable to one
another.

Against this prejudice I call upon the method of the 'longue durée'
proposed by Fernand Braudel as well as on the concept of 'authentic
invariables' coined by the Spanish architect, Fernando Chueca Goitia.

On a more practical level, I will use the idea of 'typological process',
developed by the Italian architects Saverio Muratori and Gianfranco
Caniggia, to sort out the formal genealogies of Portuguese and Brazilian
vernacular patterns.

Modular urban design takes off in Portugal during the thirteenth
century; from then on, a limited standard of lot and street dimensions
dominates town building.

In the second half of the eighteenth century there is a first and sharp
change in this standard when the Portuguese State tries for the first
time to look at its territory in a global and rationalist way.

Still, there is little change to lot widths and house types for another
century.

The adoption of the metric system in the late 1800s would cause some
change in building modules, but it is really the scale of centralized
planning and housing projects since the twentieth century that break up
the continuity of vernacular urban patterns.

# Vernacular roots of Portuguese urban traditions #

There are several cities in Portugal that originate from Roman colonies
laid out in their classic gridiron plan.

These colonies became Islamic cities during the Middle Ages and some of
them, such as Évora, continued to be inhabited after the Portuguese
conquest.

Still, for the most part, vernacular Portuguese urbanism follows the
Medieval European type of the market village around a high street.

The village begins around a focal point or landmark, such as a chapel, a
market, or the access to a castle; at first, the lots are indefinitely
deep because there is only one street.

Over time, these deep lots around the high road and the ones that are
laid out along branching streets develop secondary frontages that define
a back street on either side.

A sequence of cross streets develops to link these parallel roads,
forming large urban blocks.

These blocks eventually get broken up by alleys linking the cross streets.

This results in a dense build-up of the town core as a 'block of
blocks'---a general principle of traditional towns observed by the New
Urbanist Robert Orr.

Besides the 'organic' high street village type, there are three major
episodes of centrally mandated urban design, more or less evenly spaced
in time; all of them stem from the Portuguese crown's drive to defend,
populate, and manage Portugal's growing territory:

(1) Mid thirteenth century -- *bastide*-type new towns to secure
    Portugal's land borders and to settle agricultural frontiers;
(2) Early sixteenth century -- urban growth and overseas expansion
    promote new standards of parcel planning by both the crown and
    private developers;
(3) Late eighteenth century -- the recognition of Portugal's
    independence and colonial domains requires an efficient,
    and graphically 'rational', policy of new town planning.

In all, these three episodes establish a Portuguese and Brazilian
tradition of planned, yet flexible, new towns.

The modular measurements of these new town lots become standards in
vernacular building practice.

# Portuguese urban development modules up to the eighteenth century #

In the thirteenth century, Portuguese kings begin a policy of populating
and fortifying their borders through the foundation of new towns similar
to the French *bastides* and the Spanish *villas reales*.

The Portuguese *vila nova* is just a fortified high street village with
a regular geometric plan and controlled allotment of land.

Caminha, on a promontory along the norther border, is one of the
earliest and best preserved examples. 

The town is laid out around a straight high street, two back streets and
two cross streets.

But even if there is a geometric principle behind the plan, expediency
on the ground trumps a punctilious observance of geometry, and the
fortification has to follow the terrain.

Here we have certain geometric procedures to achieve an equal
distribution of urban lots.

The modular scheme is based on whole multiples of the Portuguese yard,
about 1 metre and 12 centimetres; this yard divides into 5 spans---hand
spans, literally---of 22 and a half centimetres.

So a standard lot will have a frontage of 5 yards, that is 25 spans, or
just over 5 and a half metres --- enough for a room and a hallway
side-by-side.

These lots are between 60 and 75 spans deep, from 13 and a half to 17
metres, which is not very deep and is a measurement that comes up in
other planned towns even where the plan is not restricted by the
topography.

This means the planners who came up with these measurements might have
taken their cues from a vernacular 'block of blocks' around 60 metres
deep, where two rows of 30-metre deep lots would back onto an alley, and
at some point new frontages would get built on this alley.

Like many Mediterranean building traditions, Portuguese houses are various
arrangements of roughly square cells.

The most basic combinations are just a few cells arranged next to one
another in a compact plan; more elaborate schemes can have large rooms
at the front and back, with a hallway and small alcoves in between.

Starting in the sixteenth century, suburban growth takes a different
form than the simple extension of the high street; rural estates start
being subdivided in a regular platting by private entrepreneurs.

In this case, the module is no longer the narrow 25-span frontage but a
larger lot size, 30 by 60 span or about 6.75 by 13 and a half metres.

Blocks are relatively shallow from the start and they lose the front
street/back street distinction.

This new module supports somewhat larger buildings, even apartment
houses, as in the bairro Alto neighbourhood of Lisbon.

Two 30 × 60 p. lots can be conveniently subdivided into three
20 p. lots for low-income housing or grouped to support a courtyard
block of flats or an aristocratic house.

# Transitional urban patterns #

During the Early Modern period, there is not much population growth in
mainland Portugal.

In the colonial empire, planned new towns usually follow the Renaissance
pattern of shallow blocks, but unplanned Portuguese settlements are
still based on the high street village.

Then, just after 1750, the Portuguese standard for new towns changes
quite sharply.

The philosophy of the Enlightenment puts forward a so-called rational
approach to territorial planning.

At the same time, Portugal needs to reassert the legitimacy of her
borders, and the visible mark of centralized town planning is one way to
achieve this.

First, there is the Lisbon earthquake in 1755; this serves as a blank
slate for the crown to experiment with strictly regular geometries,
taller buildings and broader streets.

At Vila Real de Santo António, right on the border with Spain, this
intention of appearing 'rational' and of claiming territory is evident.

The town has a single main square and, unlike Medieval planned towns,
the engineer refuses to sacrifice geometric regularity for the sake of
adaptation to the terrain---the chosen site is even located far away
from the fortifications, so he could pick a flat area to build on.

To highlight the clarity and monumentality of the plan, the streets are
very broad now: at 40 spans, they are almos three times as wide as in
Caminha.

Despite this, lot sizes do not change much. Here we are back to the
narrow and shallow lots of Caminha, with 25-span frontages and 50-span
depths---that is just over 11 metres deep.

The same broad streets and large main squares show up in many colonial
new towns founded all over Brazil around the same time, although exact
measurements are less consistent overseas than they are in the mainland.

These late eighteenth century plans seem to be the first to mandate
specific building types and even standardized façades.

During the nineteenth century, planned new towns continue to be built
mostly in Brazil, now an independent country.

Aracaju is an example of the survival of the late eighteenth century
principles, with the preference for flat sites, a strict gridiron plan,
a single central square, and narrow and shallow lots.

# House types and fringe belt development #

Traditional urban modules also continue to show up in the planned growth
of existing cities during the nineteenth century.

Here we are looking at Rio de Janeiro, then the capital of Brazil. A
large, flat site to the west of downtown was for a time a preserve of
public land.

When this gets open to development in the early nineteenth century, the
resulting suburb ends up looking even more like a Medieval or
Renaissance new town than like the more recent, late eighteenth century
'Enlightened' plans.

It has a clear hierarchy of street breadths and most lots have 20 span
frontages.

This area grows into one of the densest and socio-economically diverse
neighborhoods outside the city centre, and also one of the best
preserved nineteenth century districts. This is, in part, due precisely
to the extremely fragmented land ownership pattern of its narrow lots,
which has prevented the consolidation required for large-scale
redevelopment.

Farther to the west, mid nineteenth century development
on green fields introduces notable, though short lived, variations in
the form of 15 and 18 p. (3.4 and 4 metre) lots destined for
working-class rental. These extremely narrow lots sometimes unfold to
extreme depths, creating *cortiços* (slums or tenements) akin to the
contemporary *ilhas* in Oporto. In Rio, these narrow lots are rapidly
overrun by demand for bulkier apartment or commercial buildings,
however. This short life span of the extremely narrow lots contrasts
with the resilience of the 20 and 25 p. lots on the former *rossio*.

![Urban development on the former *rossio* of Rio de Janeiro: 100 p. thoroughfare (rua Larga de São Joaquim), 30 p. streets (rua de São Pedro and rua do Sabão) and 25 p. street (cross street), blocks mostly subdivided into 20 p. lots. Detail from Edward Gotto's plan, 1871](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/7b/Rua_de_S_Pedro_from_the_Gotto_Plan_of_Rio_de_Janeiro_1871_stitched.jpg){#fig:gotto}

Haussmanian *percées* by the federal government during
the first half of the twentieth century end up opening several stretches
of this area for the construction of large office buildings, which
compare poorly to the historic fabric in terms of diversity and
pedestrian life.
Nevertheless, those *percées* that take place during the first decade of
the twentieth century demonstrate how resilient the Luso-Brazilian
building traditions are. De Paoli has noted one of the goals of these
early urban renewal interventions is to force the consolidation of
narrow lots into broader ones, at least 6 to 7 metres wide (a
measurement reminiscent of the suburban Portuguese 30 p. lot?). However,
several such consolidated lots are redeveloped with two or more
independent structures side by side, rather than one large building
[@paoli:2013outra, 36]. New mixed use buildings granted planning consent
between 1903 and 1908 often preserve the side hallway plan type
([@Fig:saopedro]; compare with [@fig:plans]).

![Approved building application on rua de São Pedro, Rio de Janeiro, c. 1903. Arquivo Geral da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro, reproduced by de Paoli [-@paoli:2013outra]](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/05/Building_on_rua_de_S_Pedro_Rio_de_Janeiro_1903.jpg){#fig:saopedro}

# Effects of metrification on lot frontages #

Meanwhile, in 1834, Portugal officially adopts the metric system,
followed much later by Brazil in 1872. Metrification directly impacts
the construction trades and urban subdivision, not the least because it
is accompanied by a surge in new municipal and national regulations on
building and urban development. An evidence of these changes is recorded
in the urban fabric of the Portuguese city of Oporto, which grows
significantly over the course of the nineteenth century due to
industrial development. The earlier growth spurs, along pre-existing
roads, exhibit traditional urban lot frontages 20 or 25 p. wide. On the
rua do Almada, a new thoroughfare opened in 1761 but only developed much
later, on the other hand, lots are standardised at 5 metres wide
([@Fig:almada]).

![Different lot standards before and after metrification in Oporto. Base map by Augusto Carlos Teles Ferreira, 1892](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/51/Lot_modules_in_Oporto.png){#fig:almada}

Metrification and the ensuing drive for ever more comprehensive building
regulations are also at play in early twentieth century São Paulo,
Brazil's own industrial powerhouse. Lemos observes that a positivistic
will to 'improve' low-income housing in that city
[@lemos:1999republica]. Turn of the century regulations deal chiefly
with natural lighting and ventilation requirements in some (not all, at
first) rooms of the house. This results, at first, in conservative (and
inconvenient) designs where the side hallway becomes an open court; only
later do actual side setbacks become common, requiring wider lots
([@Fig:bentofreitas]).

![Rental dwellings in São Paulo, ca. 1900. @lemos:1987ecletismo](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b0/Rental_houses_on_Bento_Freitas_Street_S%C3%A3o_Paulo.png/607px-Rental_houses_on_Bento_Freitas_Street_S%C3%A3o_Paulo.png){#fig:bentofreitas}

Even as the example of São Paulo contributes to the dissemination of
side yard houses throughout Brazil in the early twentieth century,
Portuguese builders take a different approach to the mandate of natural
lighting and ventilation. Several public and private developments of the
early twentieth century, especially in the centre and south of Portugal,
experiment with an 8.5 to 9 metre wide suburban housing type made up of
four cells arranged in a square, with or without a hallway. A number of
variations on this type are to be found at Entroncamento, a railway
junction company town from the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries [@paixao:2016bairros]. These dwellings, designed by architects
and engineers, are arranged in pairs, evidencing some familiarity with
current concepts of garden suburbs ([@Fig:entroncamento]). Their
architectural style has often been condemned as merely nostalgic,
representing a superficial attachment to familiar visual cues and,
worse, playing into conservative politics [@rosmaninho:2002casa].
Contrary to this interpretation, which itself betrays a superficial
study of such houses, however, these planned dwellings demonstrate an
understanding of the long typological history of Portuguese houses, and
a conscious effort to adapt it to modern urban principles.

![Two four-cell housing types in Entroncamento, 1925--1928. @paixao:2016bairros](https://i.pinimg.com/originals/32/3c/5a/323c5aaeb43fab8b2c148867baa99102.png){#fig:entroncamento}

The increasing popularity of garden city principles as well as a
tendency to round up metric dimensions to 10 metre frontages cause the
ultimate break down of this process. In the 1960s, the widespread use of
10-metre frontages encroaches even on historic towns such as Ouro Preto
([@Fig:op-santacasa]). Nevertheless, the damaging effect of this
transformation on the character of traditional urban areas is not
noticed by historic preservationists until much later, in the 1980s
[@motta:1987sphan22, 114]. By then, the exponential urban growth of the
post-war era had already caused major loss of character in such sites.

![Unexecuted infill subdivision project in the Alto das Cabeças neighbourhood, Ouro Preto, Brazil, 1965. Left: pre-existing conditions; middle: planning application; right: as approved by the National Heritage Institute (Iphan). Redrawn in @salgado:2010ouro after @motta:1987sphan22](https://i.pinimg.com/originals/28/6b/08/286b08420d851e388ac3fd5ada17248c.png){#fig:op-santacasa}

# Conclusion #

This article surveyed the emergence and transformation of traditional
urban and building patterns in Portugal and Brazil, singling out
recurring measurements and modules.
These town building traditions remain sensibly stable
for nearly five centuries, from the early thirteenth to the mid
eighteenth century. Even as the territorial policies of 'enlightened
despotism' in Portugal impose new, centralised and monumental urban
forms onto the landscape, these forms accommodate most of the existing
practices regarding lot dimensions and house types. A crisis in
traditional patterns arises more sharply with the adoption of the metric
system in Portugal and Brazil during the nineteenth century, followed by
the turn of the century positivist approach to comprehensive urban and
building regulation. Still, elements of traditional building types
persist well into the twentieth century, only to break down in the
second half of that century.

This kind of study relies mostly on planned new towns and large urban
expansions, which show the interaction between top-down designs and
bottom-up vernacular practice. Its most significant drawback is,
therefore, its reliance on a centralised 'act of will' for evidence of
the modularity of decentralised patterns.
Urban infill and redevelopment can provide insights on the
persistence of generic building types, but the constraints of the
existing fabric and land ownership patterns are likely to supplant any
explicit choice of dimensional modules. On the other hand, these same
constraints foster the continued use of plan layouts adapted to the
existing lot sizes. A larger and more detailed body of architectural
documentation might shed light on the relationship between these
constraints and the dimensional limits the traditional building types
can reach.

Customary measurement units play a significant part in the stabilisation
of urban and building types. The *palmo* (span) and especially its
five-fold multiple, the *vara* (yard) provide sensible, minimal modules
for sizing construction elements and laying out urban units---most
importantly, lot and street widths. Lots 20, 25, and 30 p. wide occur
consistently up to the mid nineteenth century, both in developments
planned and controlled by the state, and in the private dynamics of
suburban extensions to major cities. These dimensions support specific
building types, consisting of linear arrangements of spatial cells with
or without hallways, that change very little up to the late nineteenth
century.

The successive shocks of metrification and of positivist building
regulations, in the mid to late nineteenth century, provoke conspicuous
changes in urban and building morphology, as well as the eventual split
of the Portuguese-Brazilian tradition into two separate national trends.
Even historic preservation has done little to stem the decline of
traditions, not the least due to the prevailing emphasis, in
preservation theory and practice throughout the twentieth century, on
upholding the fatalist distinction between 'original' and 'addition'
rather than on protecting the continuous *process* giving rise to
traditional urban areas.
Despite this loss, traditional plan layouts continue to provide cultural
references and models for new projects well into the first half of the
twentieth century. The spatial efficiency and functional flexibility of
such types as the townhouse, endowed since the late 1800s with a side
yard, and the foursquare cell house, compare favourably to recent types
of housing and urban development.

The long-term stability of Portuguese building modules is a case that
vindicates, in our age so fond of 'microhistory', the importance
ascribed to intrahistory by Chueca Goitia and Braudel. Yet its value
also reaches beyond the domain of the historian's craft: it is a
statement on the importance of continuity to design practice.
The study of modules in urban and building development shows the
resilience of morphological patterns and professional practices through
time. Standardised street widths, lot sizes, and building types are
valuable evidence of cumulative problem solving; aimless experimentation
and constant starting over from scratch, by contrast, have resulted in
so many failed architectural and urban projects.

# References #

[^1]: @orr:2018five. I am grateful to Douglas Duany for introducing me
to Orr's concept of a 'block of blocks.'
